.\"// $Id$
.\"// 
.\"//  Copyright (c) 1994 by the University of Southern California
.\"//  and/or the International Business Machines Corporation.
.\"//  All rights reserved.
.\"//
.\"//  Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
.\"//  its documentation in source and binary forms for lawful
.\"//  non-commercial purposes and without fee is hereby granted, provided
.\"//  that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both
.\"//  the copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
.\"//  documentation, and that any documentation, advertising materials,
.\"//  and other materials related to such distribution and use acknowledge
.\"//  that the software was developed by the University of Southern
.\"//  California, Information Sciences Institute and/or the International
.\"//  Business Machines Corporation.  The name of the USC or IBM may not
.\"//  be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"//  without specific prior written permission.
.\"//
.\"//  NEITHER THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA NOR INTERNATIONAL
.\"//  BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION MAKES ANY REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT
.\"//  THE SUITABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE FOR ANY PURPOSE.  THIS SOFTWARE IS
.\"//  PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\"//  INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\"//  MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE, AND 
.\"//  NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\"//
.\"//  IN NO EVENT SHALL USC, IBM, OR ANY OTHER CONTRIBUTOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\"//  SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\"//  TORT, OR OTHER FORM OF ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH,
.\"//  THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"//
.\"//  Questions concerning this software should be directed to 
.\"//  info-ra@isi.edu.
.\"//
.\"//  Author(s): Cengiz Alaettinoglu <cengiz@isi.edu>
.\"
.\"
.TH prpath 1 local
.SH NAME
prpath
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B prpath
.RI [ options ]\ [[<as-no>]\ <destination-specification>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
prpath enumerates a list of paths between <as-no>
and <destination-specification>.
<destination-specification> can be an AS number,
an IP address, a host name or an address prefix.
If <as-no> is not specified it is deduced for your
system from the IP address of your host and IRR. If no
<destination-specification> is given prpath goes into a command loop where
it inputs <destination-specification> from stdin, one at a line.
.PP
prpath ignores error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
Please see \-ignore_errors and \-report_errors options below.
.SH RAToolSet COMMON OPTIONS
.RS
.IP -help
Print summary of command-line options and abort.
.IP "\-T [whois_query | whois_response | input | all]"
Trace the argument. Useful for debugging.
.IP "\-D <integer>"
Print debugging messages of debug channel <integer> 
(if compiled with DEBUG defined).
.IP "\-version"
Print the version number and quit.
.IP "\-h <host-name>"
Establish an radbserver connection to host <host-name>.
.IP "\-p <port-no>"
Establish an radbserver connection to port <port-no>.
.IP "\-protocol <protocol>"
Use the <protocol> to connect to the IRR server. <protocol> can be irrd,
ripe, and bird. The default is irrd. The ripe option should be used with
the old ripe server.
.IP "\-s <source-list>"
Consider the sources specified in the comma separated <source-list>.
If an object is defined in multiple sources in <source-list>,
prpath uses the definition first encountered in <source-list>
from left to right.
.IP \-rusage
Print resource usage upon completion.
.IP "\-prompt <string>"
Set the interactive prompt to <string>.
.IP "\-ignore_errors"
Do not print error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
.IP "\-report_errors"
Print error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
.RE
.SH OTHER OPTIONS
.RS
.IP "\-as <as-no>"
Syntax check the aut-num object for <as-no>.
.IP "\-mpl <integer>"
If the shortest path between the source and the destination is N hops,
report all paths that are shorter than N + <integer>.
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.RS
.IP IRR_HOST
Specifies the radbserver host to connect.
.IP IRR_PORT
Specifies the radbserver port number to connect.
.IP IRR_SOURCES
Specifies the source list (comma separated) to consider.
.RE
.PP
Command line options take precedence over environment variables.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.nf
	% ./prpath AS2914 193.85.128.0/24
	Route:
	   NLRI: 193.85.128.0/24
	   Origins: AS2819 
	   Communities: COMM_NSFNET 
	AS2819 AS286 AS2914
.fi
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
Cengiz Alaettinoglu <cengiz@isi.edu>
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This is enhanced version of RIPE's prpath tool.
