.\"// $Id$
.\"// Copyright (c) 2001,2002                        RIPE NCC
.\"//
.\"// All Rights Reserved
.\"//
.\"// Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
.\"// documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
.\"// provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\"// both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
.\"// supporting documentation, and that the name of the author not be
.\"// used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\"// software without specific, written prior permission.
.\"//
.\"// THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\"// ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS; IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\"// AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY
.\"// DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN
.\"// AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\"// OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"//
.\"// 
.\"//  Copyright (c) 1994 by the University of Southern California
.\"//  and/or the International Business Machines Corporation.
.\"//  All rights reserved.
.\"//
.\"//    Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\"//    of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
.\"//    in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
.\"//    to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
.\"//    copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\"//    furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"//
.\"//    The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\"//    all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"//
.\"//    THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\"//    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\"//    FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\"//    AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\"//    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\"//    OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
.\"//    THE SOFTWARE.
.\"//
.\"//  Questions concerning this software should be directed to 
.\"//  irrtoolset@cs.usc.edu.
.\"//
.\"//  Author(s): Cengiz Alaettinoglu <cengiz@isi.edu>
.\"
.\"
.TH prpath 1 local
.SH NAME
prpath
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B prpath
.RI [ options ]\ [[<as-no>]\ <destination-specification>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
prpath enumerates a list of paths between <as-no>
and <destination-specification>.
<destination-specification> can be an AS number,
an IP address or an address prefix.
If <as-no> is not specified it is deduced for your
system from the IP address of your host and IRR. If no
<destination-specification> is given prpath goes into a command loop where
it inputs <destination-specification> from stdin, one at a line.
.PP
prpath ignores error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
Please see \-ignore_errors and \-report_errors options below.
.SH IRRToolSet COMMON OPTIONS
.RS
.IP -help
Print summary of command-line options and abort.
.IP "\-T [whois_query | whois_response | input | all]"
Trace the argument. Useful for debugging.
.IP "\-D <integer>"
Print debugging messages of debug channel <integer> 
(if compiled with DEBUG defined).
.IP "\-version"
Print the version number and quit.
.IP "\-h <host-name>"
Establish a whois connection to host <host-name>.
The default is whois.radb.net.
.IP "\-p <port-no>"
Establish a whois connection to port <port-no>.
The default is 43.
.IP "\-protocol <protocol>"
Use the <protocol> to connect to the IRR server. <protocol> can be irrd(rawhoisd), ripe(bird), and ripe_perl. The default is irrd. The ripe_perl option should be used with the old ripe server.
.IP "\-s <source-list>"
Consider the sources specified in the comma separated <source-list>.
If an object is defined in multiple sources in <source-list>,
prpath uses the definition first encountered in <source-list>
from left to right.
.IP \-rusage
Print resource usage upon completion.
.IP "\-prompt <string>"
Set the interactive prompt to <string>.
.IP "\-ignore_errors"
Do not print error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
.IP "\-report_errors"
Print error and warning messages due to communication to the
database server or parsing policy objects.
.RE
.SH OTHER OPTIONS
.RS
.IP "\-as <as-no>"
Use AS <as-no> as a source AS.
.IP "\-mpl <integer>"
If the shortest path between the source and the destination is N hops,
report all paths that are shorter than N + <integer>.
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.RS
.IP IRR_HOST
Specifies the IRR host to connect.
.IP IRR_PORT
Specifies the IRR port number to connect.
.IP IRR_SOURCES
Specifies the source list (comma separated) to consider.
.RE
.PP
Command line options take precedence over environment variables.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.nf
	% ./prpath AS2914 193.85.128.0/24
	Route:
	   NLRI: 193.85.128.0/24
	   Origins: AS2819 
	   Communities: COMM_NSFNET 
	AS2819 AS286 AS2914
.fi
.PP
.SH ERROR AND WARNING MESSAGES
Warning: No autnum record found for AS
.RS
.PP
The AS specified in nonexistent in the specified Database for specified soure list
.PP
.RE
Unable to lookup destination AS
.RS
.PP
If you do not specify which AS is destination AS, prpath tries to query IRR to get originating autnum. If route is non-existent, you get this error.
If you specify <ipv4_prefix> as <destination>, prpath will try to find origin of this prefix. If you specify <ipv4_address> as <destination>, prpath will try to find origin of prefix <ipv4_address>/32.
.PP
.RE
Unknown protocol!
.PP
.RS
Connection to IRR server failed. This can be caused by various reasons, see Errors manpage, IRR Communication errors.
.RE
.PP
For more error descriptions, please see
.B
Errors manual page.
.SH AUTHORS
Cengiz Alaettinoglu <cengiz@isi.edu>
.PP
Katie Petrusha <katie@ripe.net>
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This is enhanced version of RIPE's prpath tool.
